---
layout: page
title:  "1"
categories: media information communication
---


 <!-- First lecture, overview of main themes, whole module in embryo -->


  <!-- tech/alienation, analytical power -->

{% newthought 'In this first lecture,' %} I would just like to lay out what will be some of the main themes for this semester. Where possible, I will also indicate some of the more specific and concrete theses I have been thinking about for some time now, theses which I will try to sketch for you over the next twelve weeks. If successful, this overview will give you a sense of where we are going, but of course many concepts will be unclear to you and many claims might strike you as odd, unrelated, or incredible. The purpose of the subsequent sessions will be to make sense of everything (or at least most of) what I will foreshadow below.

What is the relationship between technology, rationality, and the profound confusion and alienation that characterizes contemporary life for so many people? Of course, it is a long-standing and widespread belief that technology causes alienation in some way, but I do not think this has been fully demonstrated as well as it could be. There are a few reasons why this ancient idea remains an open case, and a few reasons why I think we are currently in a position to make significant advances on this question. First, we have never had so much data on such a wide variety of social processes. It is now a commonplace to say such things about today’s wealth of data, but due to institutional inertia it remains surprisingly and unfortunately rare for intellectuals and academics to marshal data from beyond their disciplinary purview, in order to attack the genuine and immediate problems of life itself.

Our analytical capacities to extract inferences from data are themselves much better today than they were even 30 years ago. A lot of students don't realize how much of contemporary statistical data analysis was discovered in the 1980s or later. The capacity for average human beings to use these tools really only appears with cheap, mainstream personal computing throughout the 90s. On the one hand, we should be interested in leveraging these new powers, but on the other hand these new powers must themselves be an object of inquiry, for they are essentially info-technological or media powers. What happens to a society when information-processing power dramatically and rapidly increases? We want to use this power to make inferences about the world, but we also want to think critically and philosophically about its effects and what they mean for how we want to conduct ourselves today. Academics usually focus on one of these tasks, at the cost of the other, with empirical social scientists focusing on the former and “critical theorists” focusing on the latter. One of my abiding goals as an intellectual is to do both, with equal methodological seriousness applied to both tasks. Of course, that sounds grand but in the short run it really just means a lot of vague groping.

Much of what I will discuss can be found in embryonic form throughout the history of ideas, as certain debates surrounding technology are perennially rehashed in response to every new technological advancement. If I build on sometimes ancient insights or even seemingly common platitudes, it is to test, improve, and apply them with everything that is unique to our historical moment. For reasons stated above, some ancient wisdom about technology that we are inclined to interpret metaphorically (before dismissing it) today gains an almost absurdly literal and concrete traction, as in the frightening debates around Artificial Intelligence today. I will also try to provide signposts for what I think are the most interesting and promising avenues for future research, for others to pursue further. It is my wager that, if pursued vigorously and with little respect for all of the pacifying tentacles of institutions and ideologies, we are today in a unique position to possibly solve a number of long-standing riddles about how to organize ourselves and our communities in the direction of ultimate collective liberation. I think that technology, information, and media are at the heart of what's gone terribly wrong today, but also the key to unlocking it. "But where danger is, grows the saving power also," wrote Hölderlin, as cited by Heidegger.

 <!-- Defining the field(s) of media research, opposite findings -->

{% newthought 'The academic discipline known as media studies' %} is one of the most broad and vague disciplines in all of the social sciences and humanities. Academics often find their specialty everywhere ("if all you have is a hammer, then everything looks like a nail.") This tendency of all academics is exacerbated by the unique nature of media research, because in some sense media really is everywhere--almost by definition. The word *media* is the plural of the Latin word *medium,* which means *middle.*{% sidenote 'sn-id-1' '"Medium." Dictionary.com. Douglas Harper, Historian. http://www.dictionary.com/browse/medium (accessed: September 24, 2017).'%} Oxford Dictionaries provide six definitions relevant to our purposes; their quantity and ambiguity nicely demonstrate the challenge of thinking rigorously about media.{% sidenote 'sn-id-2' '“Medium.” Oxford Dictionaries. https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/medium (September 24, 2017).'%}

Here are the six definitions provided by Oxford Dictionaries. (1) "An agency or means of doing something." (2) "A means by which something is communicated or expressed." (3) "The intervening substance through which sensory impressions are conveyed or physical forces are transmitted." (4) "A particular form of storage material for computer files, such as magnetic tape or discs." (5) "The material or form used by an artist, composer, or writer." (6) "A person claiming to be in contact with the spirits of the dead and to communicate between the dead and the living."

Media is that which connects things; everything is connected to something; everything has a middle; therefore, almost everything is susceptible to some kind of description in terms of media. You might think the final definition provided by Oxford should be excluded for scientific purposes, but can we be so sure? It is an empirical fact that mysteries exist, and that life takes place within these mysteries. Consciousness remains, for all intents and purposes, a mystery. We cannot know what is beyond or outside our observable universe, we do not know exactly what is consciousness, but as mysteries they are real, objective, realities. And human life takes place "in the middle of them," so in fact we cannot exclude from consideration the question of the outside, because life does involve certain relationships with what is beyond us.

For my part, I am what you would call a political scientist, I am interested in using scientific method to identify relationships among different variables in the social world. Our protocols are very different. Empirical social scientists are trained to be extremely skeptical of claims about empirical phenomena; to make any claim about X causing Y requires focused research designs that effectively try to disprove that X causes Y. Only if you cannot disprove it after trying really hard, are we inclined to believe that, maybe, X causes Y. 

Political science research on media is hence very different, and its overall findings are almost opposite the overall findings of "media studies" and "media theory." Media research in the humanities has found a way to describe almost everything imaginable as media or "mediated." Empirical social scientists who have sought to test the effects of media, on the other hand, have needed to be more concrete. They define media as specific, countable media devices such as radios and televisions, or as specific, countable "media exposures," with manipulable contents and durations. One pattern we will find is that media research in the humanities is inclined to find large and quite extraordinary effects of media on people and society, whereas the latter has typically found small to nonexistent effects of media (although this is changing somewhat recently). This is a tricky but beguiling puzzle we should try to make some progress on.

<br>

 <!-- Historical capitulation in a nutshell, modernity in particular -->

## Modernity

{% newthought 'To think seriously about media today,' %} you have to realize that we are products of explosive historical change. What we call “modernity” has been a rapid, exponential increase in human power and freedom, as well as a human alienation so severe that we are only beginning to realize what happened. {% sidenote 'sn-id-modernity' 'Scholars debate how to date Modernity. For simplicity, we can say the plane taxies onto the runway right around 1450; takeoff is around 1789; the mid-air explosion and crash-landing are the two World Wars, respectively; and the last fire of the crash landing goes out around 1989. This arc is roughly a consensus view of Modernity, with the following period known as Postmodernity. But this kind of macro-historical periodizing is very arbitrary, with macro-history permitting many plausible descriptions.'%} The Industrial Revolution, for instance, was not just some interesting historical episode of economic growth. It was a sudden and absolute transformation of humanity. Before we could even understand what happened, the information technology revolution of the mid-20th century was yet another game-changer for the nature of life on this planet. This is the nature of exponential change, what seems unbearably vertiginous in a first stage seems like nothing compared to the next stage, which is multiplicatively more intense. While only fools make predictions about the future of complex systems, we cannot not think about the future, so one of the vexing points of interest will be how we should think about where exactly all of this is going next. Will there even be a place for creatures such as us, made of meat, which is expensive to produce, awkward and faulty, stubborn and slow to learn?

 <!-- Techno-economic Acceleration, Chaos, Pacification -->

So the civilization in which we have been born is absolutely unlike any previous civilization. The changes that define our world today only occurred very, very recently. Basically, the industrial revolution was the very beginning of what we now call economic growth. Before that, growth was so infinitesimal and gradual that for all intents and purposes, human beings did not ever really have any experience of significant and observable change in technology and living standards at a macro level. The following graph taken from Nick Bostrom's *Superintelligence* (2016, 3) gives a nice visual sense of our unique moment in economic history.

<br>

{% maincolumn 'assets/img/Bostrom_Super_EconGrowth1_p3.png' 'Bostrom, Nick. 2014. <i>Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies.</i> Oxford: Oxford University Press. Page 3.' %}

If you extend the frame of reference further back in time, it is even more clear that we are basically living through an absolutely vertiginous skyrocketing of material, productive power.

<br>

{% maincolumn 'assets/img/Bostrom_Super_EconGrowth2_p3.png' 'This graph is from Bostrom, Nick. 2014. Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Page 3.' %}

Furthermore, the present moment is characterized by equally unprecedented rates of change, even relative to those that produced our current civilization. Moore's Law refers to the empirical phenomenon in which the number of transistors in electronic computer circuits doubles roughly every two years. Less technically, each transistor on a circuit is basically one switch transmitting information, so the number of transistors in a circuit is essentially a “pound for pound” measure of information processing power. There are debates about how long Moore's law can last, whether it is slowing down right now or continuing, etc. I would say, like debates about artificial intelligence, it is not very clear what even the immediate future holds.

<br>

{% maincolumn 'assets/img/Moores_Law_over_120_Years.png' "<i>An updated version of Moore's Law over 120 Years (based on Kurzweil’s graph)</i>. Jurvetson, Steve. 2016. https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=55002144" %}

It is now well known that inequality has been increasing in many countries, but especially in the  liberal market economies of the US and UK, since the late 1970s. We know that some of this is from policy changes such as lowering tax rates on the rich,  but we also know that in every domain of creative human work highly unequal distributions are almost always observed. Whenever you have a group of people making or doing things, the outputs are characterized by what is called a “power law.”  

<br>

{% maincolumn 'assets/img/Saez-Zucman-Wealth-Inequality-521.png' 'Saez, Emmanuel, and Gabriel Zucman. 2016. “Wealth Inequality in the United States since 1913: Evidence from Capitalized Income Tax Data.” *The Quarterly Journal of Economics* 131(2): 519–78. Page 521.
' %}

The power law distribution is a boomerang-shaped distribution, which reflects a very small number of people making a very large majority of outputs,  and a very large number of people making each a very small number of outputs.  Also widely known as the 80/20 rule, power laws also characterise many other processes. Social network influence, such as the distribution of Twitter follower counts, follows a power law,  contrary to the supposedly democratizing and flattening effects of the World Wide Web. So is the rise of inequality a sinister dynamic of class war by the rich, which leftists call “neoliberalism?”  Or is it perhaps that our institutional mechanisms of governmental control were broken by an increasing techno-economic complexity that exceeds our human intelligence, so that the explosion of inequality is just a harsh and rapid relapse to human baseline? Probably there is no difference between these two descriptions, and which one you prefer is a matter of temperament and economic interests.

<br>

{% maincolumn 'assets/img/Pareto-Distribution-1.png' '"Demystifying the 80/20 Rule." 2014. Sandglaz Blog. http://blog.sandglaz.com/demystifying-8020-rule-apply-workplace-productivity/ (September 24, 2017).' %}

It is a very old idea that media serve as a kind of opium for the masses, and it is certainly hard to resist this idea today. As we'll see, there is actually an interesting current of recent empirical work that finds new and surprisingly sophisticated evidence for this idea.
In the meantime, people still watch a surprising amount of traditional television, more than 4 hours a day, on average, in the United States.

<br>

{% maincolumn 'assets/img/BusinessInsider_Nielsen_TVwatching-2016.png' 'Lynch, John. 2016. “The Average American Watches so Much TV It’s Almost a Full-Time Job.” Business Insider. http://uk.businessinsider.com/how-much-tv-do-americans-watch-2016-6 (September 25, 2017).' %}

If you factor in all of the different, non-reading media, the average person spends around 10 hours a day consuming media.

<br>

{% maincolumn 'assets/img/Nielsen_Media_by_Income-2015.png' 'Nielsen. 2015. “All About the Benjamins: When It Comes to Media Habits, Income Level Is a Key Factor.” Newswire. http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/news/2015/all-about-the-benjamins-when-it-comes-to-media-habits-income-level-is-key-factor.html (September 25, 2017).' %}

## We are not in the cockpit

This brings us to another theme or thesis that will run throughout everything that follows, which we can summarize by the following slogan: "humanity is not in the cockpit." The quotidian assumption of most Western human beings today is that we create technology to serve whatever purposes we decide to pursue. Whether this was ever true is doubtful, but even if it was true once upon a time, this notion now seems impossible to maintain. It is now perfectly reasonable to believe the inverse—and to believe it quite literally—that technology has created humans, perhaps to serve purposes we are not yet intelligent enough to understand. {% sidenote 'sn-id-simulation' 'See, for example, the so-called Simulation Hypothesis.  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simulation_hypothesis. Or try this short podcast with one proponent of this argument, the philosopher Nick Bostrom. http://philosophybites.com/2011/08/nick-bostrom-on-the-simulation-argument.html '%}

Non-trivial artificial intelligence is already here, e.g. self-driving cars. Experts say that human level machine intelligence (HLMI) is just around the corner, and machine superintelligence may be just around the corner from HLMI. About 10% for within 2 years after HLMI, and about 75% for within 30 years after HLMI.

<br>

<iframe width="800" height="700" frameborder="0" scrolling="no" src="//plot.ly/~jmrphy/153.embed"></iframe>

Of course, ancient wisdom has always admonished that what we make, in fact, makes us. But the irresistible and very real powers we have derived through each modern technological advancement have always allowed "modern people" to dismiss ancient cautions as simpleminded, fearful, conservative repressions. So long as “things are getting better,” the next innovative solution, just around the corner, is always seen as a coming justification for the deleterious effects of past technological disruptions. What is interesting in today's postmodern information age is that — in my view, at least — premodern diagnoses of the threat of technology are being scientifically validated in extraordinary ways. 

## Alien script

The human genome is basically a set of instructions for what humans are to be and what they are to do, even if humans also have some autonomy. The "purpose" of what human beings do is primarily to extend the life of their genes into the future. Of course, this is not to say there is necessarily any ultimate purpose. And of course, we are able to set our own goals, by our own motivations, and give our own descriptions of the choices we make, with or without any variety of spiritual overlays. But empirically, on one basic level of description, the primary task that unites all currently living people with all of their ancestors over millions of years—in a sense, the one thing we all have most in common – is that our bodies and our ancestors’ bodies have followed the orders of written instructions that we do not consciously understand. Anyone who refused these orders did not reproduce, so obedience to genetic orders is basically a requirement of human existence in perpetuity. And great deal of variation in human behavior, including politics, can be explained by this alien media of genetics. {% sidenote 'sn-id-genetics' 'Genes explain about %50 of the differences we observe across people. This is a rough rule of thumb, but one that is well supported by data. What it means is that if you look at all studies on all traits, and you calculate how much of the variance can be chalked up to genes, then the grand mean is about 50%. Of course, some traits are more heritable than others, and contextual factors can shape heritability itself. For one recent study that analyzed “17,804 traits from 2,748 publications,” see Polderman, Tinca J. C. et al. 2015. “Meta-Analysis of the Heritability of Human Traits Based on Fifty Years of Twin Studies.” Nature Genetics 47(7): 702–9.'%}

Now, the fact that we have been assigned genetic instructions is no proof that some creator wrote those instructions. And the fact that human beings are the outcome of an alien technology does not prove that that alien technology has a purpose. But again, postmodern information-age global capitalism appears to provide new data on this question. Specifically, capitalism and its increasing technological sophistication reveals what looks increasingly like a telos (an endpoint, destination, or purpose.) That telos is something like "increasing intelligence." Capitalism is a complex systemic form of intelligence; it organizes information at a scale no individual could. It reproduces itself. It's tendency over time is to minimize costs and inefficiencies, to exploit everything possible for the maximum value. In early stages, it could reasonably appear to be nothing more than human ingenuity conquering the environment to better promote human interests. Ancient sages, of course, always warned that a most extreme danger lies within this path. The danger is that we would create something more intelligent than us, which would then turn against us, and which we’d be unable to control precisely because it is more intelligent than us. The genie that escapes Aladdin's lamp, Frankenstein, etc.

Yet, increasingly, it is rationalists and scientists who are now pulling this alarm, although in very different vocabularies. The best example is the debate surrounding artificial intelligence today. It is now a widely recognized possibility, among the most hard-nosed and rationalist intellectuals, that in our lifetime we may see a form of machine intelligence equal to or superior to human intelligence. Many highly respected experts now take very seriously the possibility of a number of catastrophically malign outcomes.

So now, quite literally, it is scientifically plausible that humanity serves the purposes of something or someone we do not yet understand. Call it god, aliens, or robot overlords, whatever you want, but the more we learn about the informatic nature of biology, technology, economics, and even interpersonal communication, the more it looks like human societies are something like “complex media through which cosmic intelligence is increasing itself.” Even a decade ago this would have sounded loony, but spend an hour reading about quantum physics or even just the Simulation Argument and it becomes clear that the Snooty dismissal of the Loony is the new Stupid. If something like this is the case, whatever is coming next we cannot understand, by the definition of intelligence. What appears to us as a loss of control and a meltdown of humanity, which many today assume to be a massive moral failure, could very well be the successful discharging of our ethical obligations (if some ethics are more true than others, then increasing intelligence would seem ethically required, to increase the probability of arriving at the correct ethics). Could the impending end of humanity, as dramatized in the popular catastrophic imagery of global climate change, possibly be the highest intellectual and ethical achievement we are capable of, in some way we are just too stupid to understand?

In the long-run view of cosmic intelligence, descriptions in the register of the past tense and the future tense become structurally interchangeable. It makes no difference if you want to say "At the beginning of time, a superintelligent alien entity programmed the universe to increase intelligence, and humans were one stage of this process" or "the random appearance of the universe led to the random appearance of creative human agency, which has converged on the choice to produce increasingly superintelligent alien entities in the future." Either way, it would be the case that a superintelligent alien entity organizes human agency, and it is structurally insignificant whether its causal force operates on us from the past or from the future. Again, this is surprisingly rational and scientific support for the ancient, often religious, insight that the end is at the beginning and the beginning is at the end.

## Ubiquitous human deception

Another theme we will encounter repeatedly is the ubiquitousness of deception in human affairs. This is an important matter of media, because we create and install deceptions in ourselves and each other as symbolic technologies. For almost all of human history, fictions have been the primary ether for the incubation of human survival as we know it (so far). We should ask not how "the media" shape political ideologies, for instance, but rather how political ideologies are themselves media, through which humans achieve more primary goals. When human beings think and speak about politics, they're mostly lying to themselves and each other on a level they themselves do not understand. Yet there are ways of using thought and language in ways that are non-deceptive, or which at least decrease confusion, chaos, or entropy. This theme has a special urgency and relevance today, as indicated by popular catchphrases such as “fake news” or “post-truth society."
I believe the information revolution has in many ways exacerbated and multiplied the intensity of deception at increasingly deep level. Popular talk of "eco-chambers "does not begin to convey the gravity of the situation, in my view.

But at the same time, everything that in recent years has intensified the worst aspects of global capitalist civilization—including the peculiar cultural shifts of just the past few years, epitomized by events such as Brexit and Trump—also seem to contain extraordinary new pathways for creative departures from the status quo. I'm  especially interested in how to think through the tradition of revolutionary political theory, after correctly diagnosing and solving the puzzles that I've outlined above. Toward the end of our investigations, we will consider this question in more detail. For now, I can foreshadow with the following.

## Collective Liberation

If we think of the basic goal of revolutionary politics as the creation of the best possible life for all people, then we have to ask what exactly is the best possible life for all people? In other words, we need a basic model of what human beings really are, that is rigorous and accurate, which neither caters to what a particular audience wants to hear nor to what a biased author wants to think. We need the most accurate possible sense of human potential, but also a real accounting of human being’s hard constraints. Fortunately, I think many significant discoveries in psychological science provide the basic knowledge required to make genuine progress on this question.

First, a lot of research converges on the necessity of what we might call "de-instrumentalization" for optimal human experience. Here we find a quite rare convergence of radical social theory (specifically some key ideas from the Frankfurt School) and contemporary empirical psychology research, especially what is sometimes called “positive psychology.” The Frankfurt School saw “instrumental reason” as one root of modern evil and they suggest that a solution might be found in “objective reason,” or disinterested pursuit of the truth and meaning of the whole.{% sidenote 'sn-id-horkheimer' 'Berendzen, J.C. 2017. “Max Horkheimer.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, ed. Edward N. Zalta. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2017/entries/horkheimer/.'%}

From a totally different perspective, Csikszentmihalyi (me-hi-chik-sent-me-hi) promotes the concept of the “autotelic personality,” which is able to extract energizing and satisfying modes of engagement from nearly any possible situation. Ancient traditions such as Buddhism and meditation are finding more and more support from cognitive science.{% sidenote 'sn-id-buddhism' 'Wright, Robert. 2017. Why Buddhism Is True: The Science and Philosophy of Meditation and Enlightenment. New York: Simon & Schuster.'%} One of the key questions that humanity has not answered very well is the political question of how we can participate in increasing collective flourishing across an institutionally suppressed and depressed population deeply invested in deceptive, malicious, resentful, coping strategies. I'm of the view that this political question can now, in principle, be answered more accurately and effectively, with a more extraordinary and immediate practical effects than ever before. There are a lot of reasons why this is not easy, and why it remains blocked, but in principle I believe the basic idea has never been more within reach.

To summarize my overarching hypothesis as succinctly as possible, I would say something like “collective political liberation is a systemic outcome of human relationships dedicated to the truth.” This basic formulation allows for an infinitely diverse set of affinities and linguistic registers, conditioned on diverse sociological factors, while also providing a criterion for all human beings to hold other human beings accountable to the best possible version of themselves. The only legitimate criterion for this is objective reality itself, which we can never access with certainty but which we can always pursue with more or less authenticity, which we can observe and evaluate in each other. Almost by definition, such a model of political change is orthogonal to the distinction between left and right, as political ideologies are instrumentally rational perversions. The model I will sketch could potentially be taken up on the left and the right, and I believe it will point either side toward the same optimal collective endpoint without them ever having to agree on anything. This is my hunch anyway, and it would be unwise to overpromise, so I will leave it at that.
